Hello and welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. In this
video, we’re continuing with the STP toolkit
section of our CCNA course. We’re going to focus
on BPDU Guard and BPDU Filter, two features that
are often used in combination with PortFast, which
we covered in the previous video. These features
determine how a port reacts when receiving BPDUs
and, in the case of BPDU Filter, whether it sends
BPDUs, helping to protect and manage your
network's STP behavior. Let’s get started.
Here’s what we’ll cover. We’re continuing with the
STP toolkit. The previous video covered PortFast,
a feature that you should enable on switch
ports connected to end hosts, allowing them
to communicate over the network right away after
connecting. In this video, we’ll cover two more.
BPDU Guard, which automatically disables a switch
port if it receives a BPDU, and BPDU Filter, which
stops a port from sending BPDUs or processing
received BPDUs. As I said before, these features
are often used in combination with PortFast, on
ports connected to end hosts. Cisco also expects
you to know Root Guard and Loop Guard for the
CCNA, and we’ll cover them in the next video.
Before introducing BPDU Guard and Filter, let’s
see how a PortFast-enabled port handles STP BPDUs.
PortFast makes a port start in the Forwarding
state when it is connected, but it doesn’t disable
STP on the port. So, this switch’s G0/1 port has
PortFast activated, and it sends BPDUs every 2
seconds, like a regular STP port. The PC, which
doesn’t run STP, ignores the BPDUs, but G0/1 keeps
sending them. I used SHOW SPANNING-TREE INTERFACE
G0/1 DETAIL, the same command I showed a few times
in the previous video. As highlighted, PortFast is
enabled on G0/1, and it has sent 77 BPDUs so far,
but received 0 from the PC. Because
end hosts don’t run STP and send BPDUs,
a PortFast-enabled port shouldn’t receive BPDUs.
But here’s the question. What if it does? Maybe
a user brings their own switch to work, and
connects it to the network. What happens then?
Let’s see. Instead of a PC, SW1’s G0/1 is now
connected to another switch, SW2. As you know,
when a switch comes online it assumes it is
the root bridge and sends its own BPDUs. So,
what does SW1 do upon receiving a BPDU from SW2?
If a PortFast-enabled port receives an STP BPDU,
it will revert to acting like a regular STP
port, without PortFast. Let’s say SW1’s priority
is 32768. And SW2’s is 4096. Because SW2 has a
lower priority, and therefore a lower bridge ID,
SW2 becomes the root bridge, and SW1 G0/1
becomes a root port. So, what’s the problem here?
Let’s rewind a bit. Here’s a simple LAN
of three switches. SW1 is the root bridge,
with all designated ports. SW2 and SW3
each have one root port leading toward SW1,
and the link between SW2 and SW3 is blocked. Bob
from accounting is a user in the office. Now,
usually users don’t connect directly to a switch.
Instead, there is a wall jack near the user,
such as on the wall of their office, if they have
their own office. The switch connects to the wall
jack, and the user’s device does too. This is
a pretty standard setup. But let’s say Bob is
tired of walking to the printer and decides
to bring his own printer to work. And maybe
the Wi-Fi is slow, so he wants to connect
his laptop to the wired network instead of
Wi-Fi. But the wall jack in his office
only has one port. So, what does he do?
Instead of following procedure and creating
a support ticket with the IT department,
Bob takes things into his own hands. He
brings an old switch he had at home to
work and connects it to the network. Then,
he connects his devices to his switch,
and they can all access the LAN. Problem
solved, right? Well, maybe Bob’s problem
has been solved, but his switch and SW3
start exchanging spanning tree BPDUs,
and this could impact the network. For example,
what if Bob’s switch becomes the root bridge?
If Bob’s switch has a lower STP bridge
ID and becomes the root bridge, that can
affect the rest of the STP topology. Now each
switch’s root port points toward Bob’s switch,
and the SW1-SW2 link is blocked. This is a problem
– we don’t want a user’s switch affecting the
STP topology. For example, maybe SW1 was the root
bridge because it’s connected to the LAN’s router.
By making SW1 the root bridge, we ensure that each
other switch has an efficient path to reach SW1,
and therefore the router. But now, SW2’s most
efficient path is blocked, and frames from hosts
connected to SW2 have to take the less efficient
path through SW3 instead. This isn’t a disaster,
but in any case, we don’t want unauthorized user
devices negatively impacting the network. Let’s
summarize and then see how BPDU Guard solves this
problem. PortFast should only be enabled on ports
connected to non-switch devices, like end hosts
or routers. And these devices don’t send BPDUs.
However a PortFast-enabled port still sends
BPDUs and will operate like a regular STP port
if it receives BPDUs from a neighbor. So, if an
end user carelessly connects a switch to a port
meant for end hosts, like Bob from Accounting,
it could affect the STP topology. Shame on you,
Bob. Do better. But fortunately, BPDU Guard
acts as a safeguard against such a situation.
Let’s see how BPDU Guard works.
BPDU Guard protects the network
from unauthorized switches being connected
to ports intended for end hosts, such as
SW3’s G0/1 port in this example. BPDU Guard
can be configured separately from PortFast,
but both features are usually used together,
because they both enhance STP’s functionality on
ports intended for end hosts. So, what exactly
does BPDU Guard do? A BPDU Guard-enabled port
continues to send BPDUs, but if it receives a
BPDU it enters the error-disabled state. So,
if Bob connects his switch to the wall jack and
it sends a BPDU to SW3, SW3 will error-disable
its G0/1 port. In effect, this disables the port.
It can no longer send or receive data or BPDUs.
This prevents Bob’s switch from affecting the
STP topology, and Bob’s gonna be thinking “the
internet doesn’t work” and come complaining
to the IT department. Mission accomplished.
Let’s see how to configure BPDU Guard. Like
PortFast, it can be configured in two ways. First,
it can be configured per-port in interface config
mode. The command to do that is SPANNING-TREE
BPDUGUARD ENABLE. And here’s the output of SHOWING
SPANNING-TREE INTERFACE DETAIL for G0/1. As I’ve
highlighted, BPDU Guard is enabled. Okay, so you
can configure BPDU Guard on each individual port,
or you can enable it by default from global config
mode. The command to do that is SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST BPDUGUARD DEFAULT. And note that, in
modern Cisco IOS, you can optionally add the
EDGE keyword when configuring it. Either way,
the device will automatically add the keyword
to the configuration, like we covered in the
PortFast video. Here’s that same SHOW command,
showing that BPDU Guard is enabled by default.
Now, when you enable PortFast by default
it’s activated on all access ports. But BPDU
Guard works a bit differently. When you enable
BPDU Guard by default, it is activated on all
PortFast-enabled ports. Not necessarily all access
ports. Remember that difference – points like
this can definitely be tested on the CCNA exam.
But just like PortFast, after enabling BPDU Guard
by default you can then disable it on specific
ports if you want: the command is SPANNING-TREE
BPDUGUARD DISABLE in interface config mode. Okay,
that’s how you configure BPDU Guard. Use whichever
method suits you, but make sure you don’t enable
it on a port that is supposed to be connected to
another switch, as that will disable the port.
Continuing on the topic of disabling the
port, let’s look at how that works. SW3’s BPDU
Guard-enabled port has received a BPDU from Bob’s
switch, so it is error-disabled. In SW3’s CLI,
you’ll see this message appear. “Received BPDU
on port GigabitEthernet0/1 with BPDU Guard
enabled. Disabling port.” And another similar
message. “bpduguard error detected on G0/1,
putting G0/1 in err-disable state”. And then
these two messages saying the interface status has
changed to down and down. In the output of SHOW
INTERFACES G0/1, you can see that the interface
has been err-disabled. ErrDisable is a Cisco
switch feature that disables a port under certain
conditions, such as a BPDU Guard violation.
If a BPDU Guard-enabled port receives a BPDU,
that’s a violation, and the port is disabled. You
will learn a few other examples for the CCNA exam,
such as power policing violations,
Port Security violations, and DAI,
dynamic ARP inspection violations. But
those are topics for later in the course.
Let’s see BPDU Guard in action on a Cisco switch.
I’ve configured PortFast and BPDU Guard on port
1 on the left of the top switch. Below it is
another Cisco switch, so let’s connect them.
Notice that the link light turns solid amber right
after connecting it. That means the port has been
err-disabled due to BPDU Guard. It can’t send
or receive data. Even if I disconnect the cable,
the solid amber link light remains on. Normally,
the link light turns off when you disconnect the
cable, but in this case it stays on to
indicate that the port is err-disabled.
As we just saw, disconnecting the cable from
the switch doesn’t solve an err-disabled
port. So let’s see how to re-enable it so
the port can be used again. First of all,
to re-enable an err-disabled port, you should
first solve the underlying issue. This is key,
because if you re-enable the port without fixing
the issue, it will just be err-disabled again. In
this example, if I re-enable SW3’s G0/1 port, it
will just receive another BPDU from Bob’s switch
and be disabled again right away. So, let’s
disconnect Bob’s switch from the wall jack.
And then re-connect Bob’s PC. Now let’s see
how to re-enable the err-disabled port. There
are two ways to re-enable a port that has
been err-disabled: The first is manual,
using the SHUTDOWN and NO SHUTDOWN commands to
reset the disabled port. The second is automatic,
using a feature called ErrDisable
Recovery. Let’s see how it works.
ErrDisable Recovery is a feature that
automatically re-enables err-disabled ports
after a certain period of time. To view the status
of ErrDisable Recovery on the switch, use SHOW
ERRDISABLE RECOVERY. Here’s the output. At the top
there’s a list of ‘errdisable reasons’ and their
status. The list is quite long, so I’ve omitted
most of it, but as I’ve highlighted, BPDU Guard
is second on the list. And as it says, ErrDisable
Recovery is disabled by default. So, that means
that err-disabled ports won’t automatically
recover by default, you have to enable ErrDisable
Recovery if you want it. As I’ve highlighted in
pink, the default recovery timer is 300 seconds,
or 5 minutes. This means that err-disabled ports
will be automatically re-enabled after 5 minutes
if you enable errdisable recovery. You can modify
this interval if you want with ERRDISABLE RECOVERY
INTERVAL, and then the interval in seconds. But
even if you modify the interval, you still need
to enable ErrDisable Recovery for it to work,
so let’s do that. Use ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE,
and then the cause, to enable it for ports
disabled by the specific cause. The ‘cause’
is the feature that disabled the ports. For
this video we’re talking about BPDU Guard,
but as I said before we’ll cover a few other
causes later in the course. For example, if you
look at the top of the “ErrDisable Reason” list in
the output above, the top one is “arp-inspection”,
referring to DAI, Dynamic ARP Inspection,
another CCNA topic. To enable it for BPDU Guard,
use ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE BPDUGUARD, as I
did here. This time, SHOW ERRDISABLE RECOVERY
shows that it is enabled for BPDU Guard. And
G0/1 is listed at the bottom of the output,
meaning that it will be automatically re-enabled
after 296 seconds. When this timer counts down to
0, the interface will be re-enabled. One final
point: even if you use ErrDisable Recovery to
automatically re-enable disabled ports, you
still have to solve the underlying problem
like I said before. In our scenario, if Bob’s
switch is still connected to G0/1, right after
ErrDisable Recovery re-enables the port, it will
just be disabled again after receiving a BPDU.
Okay, we’ve covered BPDU Guard, now let’s move on
to BPDU Filter. Before we look at how it works,
let’s see the problem it solves. A switch port
connected to an end host continues sending BPDUs
every 2 seconds. And it does this regardless of
whether PortFast and BPDU Guard are enabled. So,
even though Bob’s PC doesn’t run spanning
tree and simply ignores any BPDUs,
SW3 keeps sending BPDUs to Bob’s PC, once every 2
seconds. If the port doesn’t connect to a switch,
sending BPDUs is both unnecessary and also
undesirable, for a couple of reasons. First
is that sending BDPUs uses some bandwidth and
processing power on the switch, although it’s
minimal. Not a big deal, but still unnecessary.
Second is that BPDUs contain information about
the LAN’s STP topology. And if maximum security
is a concern, you should avoid sending this info
to user devices. BPDU Filter solves this
by preventing a port from sending BPDUs.
Let’s explore how BPDU Filter works. As I just
mentioned it stops a port from sending BPDUs. So,
if you enable it on SW3 G0/1, it won’t send any
more BPDUs to Bob’s PC. But unlike BPDU Guard,
BPDU Filter doesn’t disable the port if it
receives a BPDU. How the switch reacts when it
receives a BPDU depends on how you configure BPDU
Filter, so let’s see how to do that. BPDU Filter
can be enabled in two ways, just like PortFast
and BPDU Guard: it can be configured per-port
in interface config mode, or by default in
global config mode. However, unlike PortFast
and BPDU Guard, BPDU Filter functions differently
depending on how you configure it. To configure it
on a specific port, use SPANNING-TREE BPDUFILTER
ENABLE in interface config mode. With BPDU Filter
enabled, the port will not send BPDUs. On top of
that, the port will ignore any BPDUs it receives.
Basically, this disables STP on the port, and
for that reason you should use it with caution,
in bold red letters. PortFast enabled on the wrong
port can cause temporary layer-2 loops. But BPDU
Filter enabled on the wrong port can cause
permanent layer-2 loops, and is a great way
to cause a broadcast storm and bring down the
network. STP is a key protocol for preventing
loops, so disabling it on a port can be very
risky. A better choice is to enable BPDU Filter
by default in global config mode. The command is
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST BPDUFILTER DEFAULT. And
again, you can optionally use the EDGE keyword
after PortFast. Just like when enabling BPDU
Guard by default, BPDU Filter will be activated
on all PortFast-enabled ports. And then you can
use SPANNING-TREE BPDUFILTER DISABLE to disable it
on specific ports if necessary. When BPDU Filter
is activated on a port by default, the port will
not send BPDUs, just like above. But here’s the
difference. If the port receives a BPDU, PortFast
and BPDU Filter are disabled, and it operates as a
normal STP port. This is the best of both worlds.
Under normal circumstances the port doesn’t send
BPDUs, but if it receives BPDUs it is able to
react appropriately – it doesn’t just ignore them.
Before we finish up, let me give you my
recommendation and one final note about
BPDU Guard and BPDU Filter. You can enable
PortFast and BPDU Guard however you prefer,
either per-port or by default. It doesn’t affect
how they operate. However you configure them,
just make sure you enable them on the correct
interfaces. But I recommend that you only enable
BPDU Filter by default, in global config
mode. Unless you have a very good reason
to enable it per-port. Disabling STP on a port
is risky business. Okay, one final note about
BPDU Guard and BPDU Filter: they can be enabled
on the same port at the same time, but the end
result depends on how you configured BPDU Filter.
If BPDU Filter is enabled in global config mode,
so it’s enabled by default, and the port
receives a BPDU, BPDU Filter will be disabled,
and BPDU Guard will be triggered, meaning it
will err-disable the interface. But what about
if BPDU Filter is enabled in interface config
mode, enabled per-port, and the port receives
a BPDU? In that case, the BPDU will be ignored,
and BPDU Guard will not be triggered. Basically,
BPDU Guard doesn’t have any effect in this
case. So once again, I think it’s better
to activate BPDU Filter in global config
mode, rather than interface config mode.
Okay, here’s a one-slide summary of this video.
PortFast should only be enabled on ports connected
to non-switch devices that don’t send BPDUs.
Usually you enable it on all ports connected
to end hosts like PCs, and maybe routers. The port
still sends BPDUs and will operate like a regular
STP port if it receives BPDUs from a neighbor.
This means that if an end user carelessly
connects a switch to a port meant for end hosts,
like Bob from Accounting did in our example,
it could affect the STP topology. To prevent this,
you should use BPDU Guard. BPDU Guard protects the
network from unauthorized switches being connected
to ports intended for end hosts. If a port with
BPDU Guard receives a BPDU, the port enters the
err-disabled state; it can no longer send or
receive data. You can enable BPDU Guard per-port
with SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE, or by default
with SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST BPDUGUARD DEFAULT. The
default option enables it on all PortFast-enabled
ports. You can then use SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD
DISABLE to disable it on specific ports,
if necessary. Now, if a port has been err-disabled
by BPDU Guard, how can you re-enable it? There are
two ways to do so. Manual with SHUTDOWN and NO
SHUTDOWN, or automatic with ErrDisable Recovery,
which automatically re-enables the port
after a certain period of time, 5 minutes
by default. To enable ErrDisable Recovery
for BPDU Guard, use ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE
BPDUGUARD. But whether you want to re-enable
ports manually or with ErrDisable Recovery,
make sure you fix the underlying problem that
caused the port to be err-disabled. Otherwise,
it will just be disabled again. Okay, finally we
covered BPDU Filter, which prevents a port from
sending BPDUs. But unlike BPDU Guard, it doesn’t
disable the port if it receives a BPDU. How the
port reacts upon receiving a BPDU depends on
how you configured BPDU Filter. Like BPDU Guard,
there are two ways to configure it. You can enable
it per-port with SPANNING-TREE BPDUFILTER ENABLE.
In this case, the port will ignore any BPDUs it
receives. So use it with caution! This basically
disables STP on the port, so if you enable it on a
port connected to another switch, it could cause a
loop. You can also enable BPDU Filter by default
with SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST BPDUFILTER DEFAULT,
which enables it on all PortFast-enabled ports.
In this case, if the port receives a BPDU,
PortFast and BPDU Filter are disabled, and the
port operates as a normal STP port. And you can
use SPANNING-TREE BPDUFILTER DISABLE to disable
it on specific ports if necessary. Okay, that’s
all for this video on BPDU Guard and Filter.
I hope it was helpful. Thanks for watching.